HTSQL Permissive License
========================

Copyright (c) 2006-2013 Prometheus Research, LLC.
All rights reserved.

Redistribution and use, with or without modification, are permitted
provided that the following conditions are met:

1. The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be
included in all copies or substantial portions of the software.

2. If this software or any Derivative Work is used or distributed for
use with a database system, that database system must be Open Source.

A database system is "Open Source" if, at the time of distribution or
use in conjunction with this software, the system may be distributed
or used without charge, the preferred source code for the database
system is generally available, and this code is either in the public
domain or licensed under terms approved by the Open Source Initiative.

By "Derivative Work" we mean any derivative work under U.S. copyright
law (or, for distribution or use outside the United States, the most
closely equivalent concept under applicable law), including, without
limitation, any improvement, translation, transformation, adaptation,
modification, arrangement, plugin, wrapper, shim, or extension based
on this software.

THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS "AS IS" AND ANY
EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY, AGAINST INFRINGEMENT, TITLE AND
FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL
AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL,
SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT
LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE,
DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY
THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT
(INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE
OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.

